Active Admin 2FA with OneLogin (#104)
rootstrap/blog: content/ActiveAdmin 2FA with OneLogin.md

      ]
    end
  end
end
```

###
**And that's all? wow!!!**

Well.... not really, sorry for getting you excited ¯\\_(ツ)_/¯

As you can see in the initializer there are some conditionals for development, that's because there is no dev out there that wants to do a 2FA every time they want to access ActiveAdmin locally.
So we still need to add some code to conditionally enable 2FA depending on the environment, and a flag (because we don't want to block access to admin if something happens to OneLogin also)

We need to check:
  - Usual admin login page works in development
  - Turning the feature off uses the old admin login and it works
  - How logout works

To perform the first two points I ended up adding the next lines to our overridden sessions_controller, seems that they are lost from super as you override it

``` ruby
# app/controllers/admin_users/sessions_controller.rb

prepend_before_action :require_no_authentication, only: [:new, :create]
prepend_before_action :allow_params_authentication!, only: :create
prepend_before_action :verify_signed_out_user, only: :destroy
prepend_before_action(only: [:create, :destroy]) { request.env["devise.skip_timeout"] = true }
```

> ** How logout works **

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**How logout works**

```

# **ActiveAdmin 2FA with OneLogin**

![main image](images/2fa.jpg)

> Here at Rootstrap, security is one of the top priorities, for us and to our clients. We ensure that malicious users can’t access any sensitive information from our client’s web apps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here at [Rootstrap](https://www.rootstrap.com/mobile-app-development-los-angeles/), security is one of the top priorities, for us and for our clients. We ensure that malicious users can’t access any sensitive information from our client’s web apps.
```

 - SLO (Single log out): SLO is a process that allows users to be logged out in one place and spread it over multiple applications

 - SSO (Single sign in): SSO is a process that allows users to authenticate into multiple services after logging into a primary service

 - Callback URL: It is a local URL in your app where a third party auth provider sends you auth data like confirmations or logout requests

##
**2) How to start with all this work?**

First take a look at this lovely [gem](https://github.com/apokalipto/devise_saml_authenticatable), you will notice that all the examples are for the `User` class, but don't worry we will show some examples for admin specifically

The specific lines you need to add are just a few ones:

First add the devise `saml_authenticable` module from our choosen gem, this will inject most of the needed capabilities.
``` ruby
# app/models/admin_user.rb

devise :recoverable, :rememberable, :trackable, :validatable, :lockable, :saml_authenticatable
```

Then tell `saml_authenticable` module which SAML fields you want to map to your model ones
``` ruby
# config/attribute-map.yml

"urn:mace:dir:attribute-def:email": "email"
```

> Almost done, add some configuration to your devise initializer to configure the comunication between your third party provider and devise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Almost done, add some configuration to your devise initializer to configure the communication between your third party provider and devise.
```

config.saml_update_user = true
config.saml_default_user_key = :email
config.saml_session_index_key = :session_index
config.saml_use_subject = true
config.idp_settings_adapter = nil
config.saml_configure do |settings|
  settings.assertion_consumer_service_url     = "#{callback}/admin/saml/auth"
  settings.assertion_consumer_service_binding = "urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:bindings:HTTP-POST"
  settings.name_identifier_format             = "urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:nameid-format:transient"
  settings.issuer                             = "#{callback}/admin/saml/metadata"
  settings.authn_context                      = ""
  settings.idp_slo_target_url                 = "https://company.onelogin.com/trust/saml2/http-redirect/slo/#{Rails.env.development? ? '1234' : ENV['SLO_TARGET']}"
  settings.idp_sso_target_url                 = "https://company.onelogin.com/trust/saml2/http-post/sso/#{Rails.env.development? ? 'you_sso_string' : ENV['SSO_TARGET']}"
  settings.idp_cert_fingerprint               = Rails.env.development? ? 'your_cert_fingerprint' : ENV['IDP_CERT_FINGERPRINT']
  settings.idp_cert_fingerprint_algorithm     = 'http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#sha256'
end
```

> Finally we need to modify devise to use our new login strategy. To achive this we will modify session management so it redirect to our third party provider like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, we need to modify devise to use our new login strategy. To achieve this we will modify session management so it redirects to our third party provider like this:
```

So we still need to add some code to conditionally enable 2FA depending on the environment, and a flag (because we don't want to block access to admin if something happens to OneLogin also)

We need to check:
  - Usual admin login page works in development
  - Turning the feature off uses the old admin login and it works
  - How logout works

To perform the first two points I ended up adding the next lines to our overridden sessions_controller, seems that they are lost from super as you override it

``` ruby
# app/controllers/admin_users/sessions_controller.rb

prepend_before_action :require_no_authentication, only: [:new, :create]
prepend_before_action :allow_params_authentication!, only: :create
prepend_before_action :verify_signed_out_user, only: :destroy
prepend_before_action(only: [:create, :destroy]) { request.env["devise.skip_timeout"] = true }
```

**How logout works**

At this point you have 3 options to logout:
  - destroy your app session
  - destroy saml session
  - force logout from your third party auth partner

> For this specific case we needed to perform the first one only, because logging someone out of OneLogin means they will be logged out of a lot of apps, and that was not desired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this specific case, we needed to perform the first one only, because logging someone out of OneLogin means they will be logged out of a lot of apps, and that was not desired.
```

# **ActiveAdmin 2FA with OneLogin**

![main image](images/2fa.jpg)

Here at Rootstrap, security is one of the most important topics we discuss with our clients. We ensure that hackers and cyber-thieves can’t access any sensitive information from our client’s web apps.

In this blog post, you’ll learn how to configure two factor authentication with OneLogin for your admin panel

##
**1) Some key concepts**

 - SLO (Single log out): SLO is a process that allow users to be logged out in one place and spread it over multiple applications

 - SSO (Single sign in) : SSO is a process that allows users to authenticate into multiple services after logging into a primary service

 - Callback URL : Is a local URL in your app where third party auth provider send you auth data like confirmations or logout requests

##
**2) How to start with all this work?**

> First take a look at this lovely [gem](https://github.com/apokalipto/devise_saml_authenticatable), you will notice that all the examples are for the `User` class, but don't worry we will show some examples for admin specifically

Reviewer: Seems a bit sarcastic 😅

Author: haha didn't intent to be sarcastic at this point, I really like the gem ❤️

Reviewer: "at this point" 😂. So the sarcastic stuff was coming later?

> The specific lines you need to add are:

Reviewer: Maybe explain a bit more about what each line does. I'd be a bit unsure about adding stuff I don't understand

    settings.idp_slo_target_url                 = "https://company.onelogin.com/trust/saml2/http-redirect/slo/#{Rails.env.development? ? '1234' : ENV['SLO_TARGET']}"
    settings.idp_sso_target_url                 = "https://company.onelogin.com/trust/saml2/http-post/sso/#{Rails.env.development? ? 'you_sso_string' : ENV['SSO_TARGET']}"
    settings.idp_cert_fingerprint               = Rails.env.development? ? 'your_cert_fingerprint' : ENV['IDP_CERT_FINGERPRINT']
    settings.idp_cert_fingerprint_algorithm     = 'http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#sha256'
  end
```

Finally we need to modify devise to use our new login strategy. To achive this we will modify the session management and redirect to our third party provider like this:

```ruby
# app/controllers/admin_users/sessions_controller.rb

module AdminUsers
  class SessionsController < Devise::SessionsController
    # As you are overwriting devise session controller you need this to allow to login with user & pass (dev mode)
    prepend_before_action :require_no_authentication, only: [:new, :create]

    layout 'active_admin_logged_out'
    helper ::ActiveAdmin::ViewHelpers

    def new

>       unless Rails.env.development? || SettingsStore.get(:admin_sso_enabled)

Reviewer: That OpsFlip was specific for us

```suggestion
      unless Rails.env.development?
```

        return redirect_to :new_saml_admin_user_session
      end

      super
    end
  end
end
```

```ruby
# config/initializers/active_admin_devise.rb
module ActiveAdmin
  module Devise
    def self.controllers
      {
        sessions: "admin_users/sessions",
        passwords: "active_admin/devise/passwords",
        unlocks: "active_admin/devise/unlocks",
        registrations: "active_admin/devise/registrations",
        confirmations: "active_admin/devise/confirmations"
      }

>     end

Reviewer 3: Leave an empty line after this :)

    def self.controllers_for_filters
      [
        ::AdminUsers::SessionsController,
        SessionsController,
        PasswordsController,
        UnlocksController,
        RegistrationsController,
        ConfirmationsController,
      ]
    end
  end
end
```

###
**And that's all? wow!!!**

Well.... not really, sorry for getting you excited ¯\\_(ツ)_/¯

> As you can see in the initializer there is some conditionals for development, that's because there is no dev out there that wants to do a 2FA every time they work locally

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As you can see in the initializer there is some conditionals for development, that's because there is no dev out there that wants to do a 2FA every time they work locally.
```

So we still need to add some code to conditionally enable 2FA depending on the environment, and a flag (bacause we don't want to block access to admin if something happen to OneLogin also)

We need to check:
  - Development usual admin login page works
  - Turning feature off uses old admin login and it works
  - How logout works

To perform first two points I ended up adding next lines to our over written sessions_controller, seems that they are lost from super as you over write it

``` ruby
# app/controllers/admin_users/sessions_controller.rb

prepend_before_action :require_no_authentication, only: [:new, :create]
prepend_before_action :allow_params_authentication!, only: :create
prepend_before_action :verify_signed_out_user, only: :destroy
prepend_before_action(only: [:create, :destroy]) { request.env["devise.skip_timeout"] = true }
```

** How logout works **
At this point you have 3 options to logout:
  - destroy your app session
  - destroy saml session
  - force logout from your third party auth partner

> For this specic case we needed to perform the first one only, because logging someone out of OneLogin means he will be logged out of a lot of apps, and there was no need to force logout someone.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For this specific case we needed to perform the first one only, because logging someone out of OneLogin means he will be logged out of a lot of apps, and there was no need to force logout someone.
```

> Actually it was a pain in the knee to do this, because `devise_saml_authenticable` gem add routes with a `class_eval` approach directly to `Devise` engine, leaving you with almost no way to configure which routes you really want or not. You will be asking yourself `Why would I like to remove a route?`, well... that's becasue at this point you have 2 `admin/logout` routes in your app, and we know this is not a good practice by any mean.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Actually it was a pain in the neck to do this, because `devise_saml_authenticable` gem add routes with a `class_eval` approach directly to `Devise` engine, leaving you with almost no way to configure which routes you really want or not. You will be asking yourself `Why would I like to remove a route?`, well... that's because at this point you have 2 `admin/logout` routes in your app, and we know this is not a good practice at all.
```

https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/a+pain+in+the+neck

I ended up with this solution as the "cleanest":

``` ruby
# config/initializers/devise.rb

> # place this ouside any file definition at the bottom to ensure is the last interpreted by ruby

Author: Will add it as an option

ActionDispatch::Routing::Mapper.class_eval do
  protected
  def devise_saml_authenticatable(mapping, controllers)
    if ::Devise.saml_route_helper_prefix
      prefix = ::Devise.saml_route_helper_prefix
      resource :session, only: [], controller: controllers[:saml_sessions], path: '' do
        get :new, path: 'saml/sign_in', as: "new_#{prefix}"
        post :create, path: 'saml/auth', as: prefix
        get :metadata, path: 'saml/metadata'
        match :idp_sign_out, path: 'saml/idp_sign_out', as: "idp_destroy_#{prefix}", via: [:get, :post]
      end
    else
      resource :session, only: [], controller: controllers[:saml_sessions], path: '' do
        get :new, path: 'saml/sign_in', as: 'new'
        post :create, path: 'saml/auth'
        get :metadata, path: 'saml/metadata'
        match :idp_sign_out, path: 'saml/idp_sign_out', via: [:get, :post]
      end
    end
  end
end
```

##
**3) Conclusions**

A project that was estimated to last over a month (or so), end ups tacking only 2 weeks because we found a great gem that solves most of our problems (besides the gem implementation was not the best).

> Besides solving this, work does not end here, I'm planning on contribute back to this awesome gem to improve its quality and support missing points we speak of. And my goal with this post besides showing how to solve a security problem, is to encourage others to contribute back when you see you can do it, without contributions like this, this gem wouldn't exist either this post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Work does not end here, besides solving this I'm planning to contribute back to this awesome gem to improve its quality and support missing points we speak of. And my goal with this post besides showing how to solve a security problem is to encourage others to contribute back when you see you can do it, without contributions like this, this gem wouldn't exist and neither would this post.
```

> Besides solving this, work does not end here, I'm planning on contribute back to this awesome gem to improve its quality and support missing points we speak of. And my goal with this post besides showing how to solve a security problem, is to encourage others to contribute back when you see you can do it, without contributions like this, this gem wouldn't exist either this post.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Besides solving this, work does not end here, I'm planning on contributing back to this awesome gem to improve its quality and support missing points we mentioned. And my goal with this post besides sharing how to solve a security problem, is to encourage others to contribute back when you see you can do it, without contributions like this, this gem wouldn't exist, neither this post.
```

> <!-- Docs to Markdown version 1.0β17 -->

Reviewer 4: Lo que?

Author: No idea if this is needed, just c&p from other blog 👀 . Should I remove it then?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, that shouldn't be necessary.
